Notes:

Hi Gemma and Joanna,
Hope you have been able to enjoy all this sunny Scottish weather we've been having lately!

I finally got around to looking at the data Gemma sent, and I've been thinking about how best to proceed. I think the most important question to ask is what the ultimate goal is. In the context of the original experiment, the goal was to compare the utility of these different fractionation methods for understanding soil C dynamics. Using this lens, the presence of black carbon can be said to challenge a key assumption behind the most commonly used soil C fractionation approaches, i.e. that large and light components of the soil contain the most easily decomposed carbon. A logical follow-up question would be given this, what are the implications for using these techniques to understand soil C dynamics?

Before I get into some thoughts about this, couple of quick questions for you:
  1) In the manuscript you say "Selected samples were analysed for 14C content after HyPy, confirming a substantial contribution of BC to the POM fraction (~17%)"; can you share those data with me?
  2) Related to 1, which samples did you isolate the black carbon for which you measured 14C? Can you share those data/tell me a bit more about it?
  3) Can you think of any data source for estimating carbon fluxes at this site? The problem with using the radiocarbon age to infer the input is that to derive the radiocarbon age we need a model, and to generate a model it is really helpful to have the fluxes...

The inherent problem with fractionating soil organic matter in the laboratory is that the tools and techniques used are not the same as in situ, leading to the propagation of methodological artifacts when extrapolating from laboratory results to natural processes. However, even if the fractionation is imperfect, it can still provide critical information about the distribution of ages of soil organic matter. If the radiocarbon content is different among the different fractions, this suggests that the soil reservoir is heterogeneous. As soils are characteristically not well-mixed systems, this distribution can provide boundaries on the range of carbon ages in the system, which can be useful in model fitting.

Modeling carbon dynamics in a heterogeneous, poorly mixed system like soil traditionally employs different pools with a range of intrinsic decomposition rates: from annual to decadal to millenial. Data from soil carbon fractionation studies have been used to parameterize these model pools, but they can also be constructed on a purely theoretical basis. Using empirical data can lead to problems when operationally defined pools correspond poorly to the mechanisms actually operating in the system, or underconstrained models when the number of pools or connections between pools are unknown. Partitioning soil carbon into purely conceptual pools can also lead to underconstrained model systems, and if the model pools are defined purely by their intrinsic decomposition rate the model system may not be tractable for understanding how the system will react to external forcing. 

In the context of this study, the presence of very old, apparently persistent, charred material in the larger and lighter size fractions challenges the mechanistic assumptions underlying the fractionation approach. Since black carbon is present in nearly all of the Zimmerman and Sohi pools, the mean radiocarbon values for these fractions do not provide much information about carbon dynamics, especially as we do not have any information about the source of the black carbon. However, the data suggest that most of the black carbon is very old, insofar as the normally modern free light pools (Z_POM, S_LF) are substantially radiocarbon depleted, and the radiocarbon signature of the black carbon itself (isolated from ??) is extremely low: -902.1‰.

In order to understand how the different fractions obtained by these distinct fractionation methods relate to carbon dynamics, we need to find a solution for assessing the role of black carbon in the system. Using a modeling approach there are two options:
  1) incorporate the black carbon component into the mechanistic pools defined by the fractionation method, or
  2) model black carbon as a conceptual pool, e.g. in a three pool system with "fast", "slow", and "resistant" (i.e. black carbon) pools

One interpretation of the results is that the intrinsic chemical recalcitrance of the black carbon present in these different pools leads it to decompose at a different rate than the other organic matter in the pool. A problem with this interpretation is that the black carbon may have been "pre-aged", for example coal dust entering the system that is radiocarbon-dead. We also know from many other studies that not all black carbon is equally persistent in soils, as the initial substrate, combustion conditions, and subsequent soil interactions all affect its decomposition rate. However, using this interpretation, we can still apply a mechanistic interpretation to the "pools" yielded by the fractionation approach in much the same way by considering the age of the pool as a representing a distribution rather than just a mean value. The presence of black carbon pulls the distribution to the right, essentially creating a very long tail, and exerting a corresponding pull on the mean age of the pool (i.e. making it older). We could likely recreate this kind of distribution by playing around with the model structure: the size of the pools, intrinsic decomposition rates, and the transfers between the pools.

Alternatively, the simplest conceptual modeling approach would be to calculate the amount of black carbon in the soil and then calculate the 14C content of the bulk soil arithematically 





The next question is whether or not the reservoir is well-mixed. This question can be answered empirically by comparing the mean age of carbon leaving the system, or the system transit time, with the mean age of the system itself. If they are not the same, the system is not well-mixed. The age of carbon leaving the system can be measured empirically by observing the radiocarbon content of heterotrophically respired C. Alternatively, for a steady-state system, transit time can be calculated as the inverse of tau, which is the stock of carbon in the system divided by the carbon flux. In either case, transit time can then be compared to a single pool model estimate of the mean age of carbon in the system to determine if is is well-mixed.

From the perspective of a microbe, it is quite obvious that the system is poorly mixed, and empirical data support this interpretation. Soil organic matter is a chemically heterogeneous mixture of organic compounds hidden in aggregates, bound to soil minerals, dissolved in the soil solution, or embedded in the cells, membranes and exudates of living, breathing, and dying microbes. Contemporary theory points to three primary mechanisms controlling microbial access to soil organic matter and thereby leading to soil carbon persistence: physical protection, e.g. occlusion in aggregates, interactions with soil minerals, and intrinsic chemical recalcitrance. Understanding how these mechanisms respond to controls such as temperature, moisture, pH, etc., is important for understanding whether or not the soil will continue to serve as a sink for atmospheric carbon under present and future climate change. Accordingly, the goal of most soil fractionation approaches is to isolate soil organic matter pools on the basis of these mechanisms, e.g. using density or size to identify highly processed organic matter and organic matter in association with soil minerals versus minimally processed material still in relatively large chunks.
